[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
nina warhurst and charlie state our
headlines today
pressure grows to shut more schools a
teaching union demands a two-week
closure of all primaries and secondaries
in england
a new warning of the hospitals a senior
doctor tells breakfast that nhs staff
across the uk should prepare for a spike
in covid admissions 50 years since the
ibrox disaster in which 66 football fans
were killed
rangers and celtic will come together to
pay tribute to the victims
on your own from australia's devastating
wildfires we hear how people's lives in
the landscape are on the road to
recovery
good morning manchester united close the
gap and go level on points with the
champions liverpool at the top of the
premier league
after beating aston villa last night
down and up
down and up exploding 30 seconds and he
got millions of us
up and about during lockdown in 2020 but
what's joe wick's got planned for 2021
we'll speak to him just before nine
good morning our cold spell of weather
is going to continue for quite a while
yet today it's a frosty start with a
risk of icy stretches this morning
it's a day of sunshine and showers but
those showers again will be wintry at
times with further snowfall particularly
in northern scotland i'll have more a
bit later on
[Music]
it's saturday the 2nd of january good
morning our top story the country's
largest teaching union is calling for
all schools in england to close for two
weeks
after the government ordered all
primaries in london to remain
shot when the new term begins pupils in
some boroughs in the capital
were due to return on monday government
says the city-wide closures were a last
resort due to rising coronavirus
infections
here's our education correspondent dan
johnson
keeping children in school has always
been the priority
with closures and more home learning a
last resort
the government was forced to make that
move announcing on wednesday that
primary schools in most parts of london
and some other areas in the south east
couldn't have pupils back next week
because of increasing case numbers the
london boroughs not included
challenged that patchwork approach
questioning the criteria
and pointing out some children
cross-borders to go to school
last night the education secretary
announced a change
which means all london's primary schools
will now stay closed
the absolute right place for all
children to be is in
school but we need to really focus on
making schools safe
and ensuring that we get a clear
strategy now in place to support
our most disadvantaged children who
we're extremely worried about that
attainment gap which is growing
massively for them as this pandemic
continues to rage
it's not the first decision the
department for education has had to
reverse
but ministers say they're responding to
fast-moving situations
and changing local conditions they
stress the priority has always been to
keep schools open where possible
but now more than a million primary
school children face
at least a fortnight learning from home
that means frustration for many parents
and some teachers too it is completely
unacceptable
that we keep having these u-turns these
last-minute decisions
where parents don't know where they are
where teachers and school staff
just don't know where they are and the
other thing i would have to say is
we don't see this happening in wales or
northern ireland or scotland we don't
see these
u-turns these uh you know the furious
reversals in policy
and that makes for a much calmer
environment for both parents and
education professionals
the changes announced earlier this week
in england means secondary school pupils
taking exams will go back
on the 11th of january all others will
learn remotely until at least the 18th
most primary schools will still open as
normal on monday
apart from those in the virus hotspots
of london and the south
east they'll stay closed to all but
children of key workers
and vulnerable families in northern
ireland the return will be delayed by a
week or more
online learnings planned for pupils in
wales until the 11th of january
and in scotland classrooms won't fill up
until at least the middle of the month
officials can't rule out more schools
being disrupted
or these closures going beyond a
fortnight some are already calling for
other schools to be included
the government says it will do all it
can to keep children in the classroom
dan johnson bbc news
a number of hospitals are now facing a
worse situation than at the peak of the
first wave of the pandemic last year
that's according to the president of the
royal college of physicians
professor andrew goddard says nhs staff
are braced for a difficult few months as
a result of the new variant of the virus
our health reporter jim reed has more
the pressure on hospitals in parts of
the country
shows no sign of easing off staff are
tired
some wards are at the limit of their
capacity
all hospitals that haven't had the big
pressures that they've had in the south
east and london and south wales
should expect that it's going to come
their way this new variant is
definitely more infectious and is
spreading across the whole of the
country
it seems very likely that we're going to
see more and more cases
wherever people work in the uk and we
need to be prepared for that
another 53 285 virus cases were recorded
across the uk yesterday 616 people lost
their lives to the virus
in london the nightingale hospital is
now being readied for action
it's thought it would soon start to take
non-covered patients
or those recovering from the disease
vaccinations are seen as the way out of
this crisis
a million doses of the pfizer biontech
jab have been delivered
but gps are being asked to postpone a
second booster shot
giving it after three months rather than
three weeks
to roll it out more quickly senior
doctors say one dose is still effective
but for some any delay to that booster
is concerning
darren a pharmacy technician suffers
from a serious breathing condition and
had his first vaccine dose
on boxing day it'd be devastating
another three months when you said when
you're so close
and you think oh you know life
and if that's put off another three
months
it's a huge impact huge
the government says tens of millions of
doses of at least
two coved vaccines will be available by
the spring
getting those to the people who need the
most will be crucial
as the nhs fights the winter wave of
this pandemic
jim reid bbc news today marks the 50th
anniversary
of the ibrox disaster when 66 people
were crushed to death
leaving a football match between rangers
and celtic in glasgow
it was one of scotland's worst peacetime
tragedies as andrew picking reports
1971 was only two days old when rangers
met celtic at ibrox
the game was dull and many fans started
leaving before late goals for either
side during the last five minutes
the day became infamous for the deadly
cross which developed on a stairway at
the ranger's end of the stadium
among the victims were five teenagers
from mark inch and fife
who never came home we were all together
just
joking having a wee bit of banter there
was no animosity because they were
ranger supporters we were celtic
supporters
there was nothing like that we were we
were pals
celtic fans peter lee and shane fenton
were among those who left early that day
it wasn't until we got back to
kincardine where the
supporters bushes used to stop on the
way back the older boys were going for a
pub for a pint or whatever it was when
they came back out the pub
onto the bus they were telling us i'd
seen on the television there'd been an
incident
eyebrocks there had been fatalities
the rangers entered the ground that was
the first of us knowing
about the anything happening at all
the boys were among the 66 dead and 145
injured 50 years on modern crowd science
has given us a better understanding of
what went wrong
in a crowd that's packed to the levels
of density that
eyewitnesses were commenting on at ibrox
and
on a slope then you get the
gravitational force
added to the fall and as each person
falls onto others
then you get a cascade dynamic in the
wake of the disaster
rangers rebuilt the stadium making it
one of the safest in europe
across scotland on january 2nd people
will mark the 50th anniversary of the
ibrox disaster
andrew picken bbc news
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news